Informally speaking, a data stream is a sequence of data that is too large to be
stored in available memory. The data may be a sequence of numbers, points,
edges in a graph, and so on. There are many examples of data streams, such as
internet search logs, network traffic, sensor networks, and scientific data streams
(such as in astronomics, genomics, physical simulations, etc.). The abundance of
data streams has led to new algorithmic paradigms for processing them, which
often impose very stringent requirements on the algorithm’s resources.
Formally, in the streaming model, there is a sequence of elements a1, . . . , am
presented to an algorithm, where each element is drawn from a universe [n] =
{1, . . . , n}. The algorithm is allowed a single or a small number of passes over
the stream. In network applications, the algorithm is typically only given a single
pass, since if data on a network is not physically stored somewhere, it may be
impossible to make a second pass over it. In other applications, such as when data
resides on external memory, it may be streamed through main memory a small
number of times, each time constituting a pass of the algorithm.
The algorithm would like to compute a function or relation of the data stream.
Because of the sheer size, for many interesting problems the algorithm is necessarily
randomized and approximate in order to be efficient. One should note that
the randomness is in the random coin tosses of the algorithm rather than in the
stream. That is, with high probability over the coin tosses of the algorithm, the
algorithm should correctly compute the function or relation for any stream that is
presented to it. This is more robust than say, if the algorithm assumed particular
orderings of the stream that could make the problem easier to solve.
In this survey we focus on computing or approximating order-independent
functions f(a1, . . . , am). A function is order-independent if applying any permutation
to its inputs results in the same function value. As we will see, this is often
the case in numerical applications, such as if one is interested in the number of
distinct values in the sequence a1, . . . , am.
